[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: One day, a physicist, a philosopher and an economist walk into a bar, they down a few
[Amit Varma]: pegs and then decide to play a game.
[Amit Varma]: The philosopher has an idea.
[Amit Varma]: He says, let's ask each other the most difficult, unanswerable question from our respective
[Amit Varma]: fields.
[Amit Varma]: Whoever asks the toughest question gets the rest of his drinks free.
[Amit Varma]: The other two men agree.
[Amit Varma]: Both of them seem confident.
[Amit Varma]: The physicist is the first to go.
[Amit Varma]: He asks, what was there before the beginning of time?
[Amit Varma]: The other two men nod thoughtfully and go bottoms up with their tequila shots.
[Amit Varma]: Then it's the philosopher's turn.
[Amit Varma]: He asks, what is the meaning of life?
[Amit Varma]: This surely has to be the winner.
[Amit Varma]: What could be tougher than this?
[Amit Varma]: What is the meaning of life?
[Amit Varma]: All three men look very sad.
[Amit Varma]: Then finally, the economist has a start.
[Amit Varma]: His question is this.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't real estate prices in Mumbai crash when demand has gone down so much?
[Amit Varma]: The physicist and the philosopher look at each other in bewilderment and disappointment.
[Amit Varma]: They know the game is over.
[Amit Varma]: The economist gets free drinks all the rest of that evening.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: On this episode, I intend to ponder the question, why don't Mumbai's real estate prices fall?
[Amit Varma]: This is one of the most expensive cities in the world and usually prices are a function
[Amit Varma]: of supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: If demand falls, prices should fall.
[Amit Varma]: Now, demand certainly has fallen here over the last few years.
[Amit Varma]: Less and less people are buying flats, inventory is lying empty, and yet the prices just won't
[Amit Varma]: fall.
[Amit Varma]: There's no straightforward answer for this.
[Amit Varma]: It's clearly the unseen effect of something.
[Amit Varma]: But what?
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, we're going to try and solve this mystery by working backwards from
[Amit Varma]: this unseen effect.
[Amit Varma]: And the economic detective who is going to help me do this is my good friend Vivek Kaul,
[Amit Varma]: a columnist at Equity Master and the author of four very fine books.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So Vivek, one of the subjects in which you've written about repeatedly over the years is
[Amit Varma]: real estate.
[Amit Varma]: And it's something that baffles me.
[Amit Varma]: I have a lot of sort of newbie questions on it, which I'm hoping you can shed some enlightenment.
[Amit Varma]: Now, real estate prices in our cities, especially in Bombay, where I live, have just shot up
[Amit Varma]: over the last decade and a half.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing that's happening over the last couple of years is that even
[Amit Varma]: though the economy isn't doing that great per se, and a lot of inventory is not selling
[Amit Varma]: now, you would imagine that when inventory doesn't sell, the prices come down at some
[Amit Varma]: point.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not happening.
[Amit Varma]: And real estate in Bombay essentially remains out of reach for middle class people like
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: So I mean, you know, it's not just real estate in Bombay, which remains out of reach.
[Guest]: I mean, real estate in a lot of other cities.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, even, you know, the towns in Uttar Pradesh, like Kanpur, or the city that I grew
[Guest]: up in, Ranchi, real estate prices are, you know, have reached crazy levels, when you
[Guest]: compare it to the income in that particular city, you know, I mean, I remember a few years
[Guest]: back, I had done this very basic calculation around the weighted average price of a flat
[Guest]: in a given city, divided by the average income that an individual was making in that city.
[Guest]: And I got some crazy numbers.
[Guest]: So I think for Bombay, it was some 70 years income, which was required.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And put that into perspective, what should it be?
[Amit Varma]: What is it in like, say, New York, London?
[Guest]: Probably, I mean, I mean, New York and London are, I mean, would be high because of would
[Guest]: be high, but they wouldn't be so high, I mean, but on an average, in the West, they say that
[Guest]: around five to six years income, it should be good enough to buy a house in Bombay was
[Amit Varma]: 70 years.
[Guest]: It was 70 years.
[Guest]: So I mean, I remember the the average weighted average price of a flat was around 1.34 crore.
[Guest]: And the per capita income as per the state GDP numbers came to around 1.97 lakh or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: It was crazy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I need a drink after the show.
[Guest]: And in fact, interestingly, for Bangalore, I got an even higher number of some 81 years,
[Guest]: which I had to discard because I found it a little unbelievable that, you know, the
[Guest]: ratio would be greater in Bangalore than in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: A lot more expats coming back with more money to spend.
[Guest]: No, not really.
[Guest]: Basically, the per capita income was a lot lower, which was the yes, because see Bangalore
[Guest]: also I guess what happens is a lot of the smaller towns around Bangalore got counted
[Guest]: into, you know, calculating the average income of Bangalore and their incomes were not as
[Guest]: high as.
[Guest]: So that's not exactly a reliable figure.
[Amit Varma]: It was not a very high.
[Amit Varma]: But why is it so high?
[Amit Varma]: Like Bombay at 70, while Western cities are at five or six?
[Amit Varma]: How?
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: How is it possible?
[Guest]: I mean, the simple answer is that one is that the supply is not at the right prices.
[Guest]: And even though the sales have collapsed, I mean, if you look at the last, I mean, there
[Guest]: was one survey which was done recently, which took the data for around 42 Indian cities
[Guest]: into account.
[Guest]: And they said that the home sales had fallen by around 41 percent, but prices haven't.
[Guest]: Now, recently, the National Housing Bank released the Residex Index, I mean, it's a real estate
[Guest]: index, which they've had for some time, but they sort of updated it and re-released it.
[Guest]: And now it has a lot more data than it had in the past.
[Guest]: And that threw up some very interesting numbers.
[Guest]: Now, between March 2016 and March 2017, the median return on real estate in 49 Indian
[Guest]: cities was 2.8 percent.
[Guest]: If you took out, there was one city, Vizag, which had given a return of 24 percent in
[Guest]: the last one year.
[Guest]: So if you took that out, the median return was 2.55 percent.
[Guest]: What that tells you is, actually, I would like to highlight another point here.
[Guest]: So the data in this index starts from June 2013.
[Guest]: So if you look at the median return per year between June 2013 and March 2017 on investing
[Guest]: in real estate in India across 49 cities, it was 4.3 percent.
[Amit Varma]: So demystify this for me.
[Amit Varma]: What is the median return and what should it be and why does it matter?
[Guest]: So median return is essentially, you know, if you have a long series of data, it's the
[Guest]: middle point.
[Guest]: It's not the average wherein you add it and divide it.
[Guest]: So this is the middle point of the data.
[Guest]: So 4.3 percent per year return over a four-year period, which isn't huge.
[Guest]: So what that tells you is that even though the real estate prices are not falling, they
[Guest]: haven't risen at the same rate as they were in the past.
[Guest]: And also, you know, this also tells you that, you know, the notion that people have in their
[Guest]: head that real estate will always go up isn't really correct.
[Guest]: In fact, if you look at prices over the last one year, in 13 out of the 49 cities, prices
[Guest]: have actually gone down.
[Guest]: Also, you know, at 4.3 percent return or 2.55 percent return, I mean, it's not worth investing
[Amit Varma]: in real estate.
[Amit Varma]: It's a waste of capital.
[Guest]: It's a waste of because there are so many other, you know, costs attached to it.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to pay maintenance charges.
[Guest]: I mean, building maintenance charges these days are absolutely crazy.
[Guest]: Then you have to pay a property tax every year.
[Guest]: If you've bought a home on a loan, you have to pay interest on it.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, you get a tax benefit as well.
[Guest]: The rental yields are, you know, 2 percent.
[Guest]: I mean, so if you were to sort of use a ballpark figure, investing in real estate makes sense
[Guest]: if the returns are at least 10 percent per year.
[Guest]: And in the sample that, you know, in the data for 49 cities that NHB put out, only three
[Guest]: cities over the last four years have given returns of greater than 10 percent.
[Amit Varma]: Which are those?
[Guest]: So I think one was Vizag and I don't remember the other two.
[Guest]: One was Vizag, Meerut, I think, and there's a third one.
[Amit Varma]: I think I'm going to relocate to Vizag and start a podcast called the Vizag Bulletin
[Amit Varma]: and you will always be welcome as a guest.
[Amit Varma]: So this is what I can't wrap my head around, like while ago you said that one of the problems
[Amit Varma]: is that supply hasn't reached its real price and its real price, as we all know, is whatever
[Amit Varma]: supply and demand it should be.
[Amit Varma]: So if demand falls by, say, 42 percent, like a figure you mentioned in one of the contexts,
[Amit Varma]: you would expect the prices to therefore adjust accordingly.
[Guest]: And that simply isn't happening and I can't wrap my head around it.
[Guest]: Why isn't it happening?
[Guest]: There are multiple reasons for it.
[Guest]: I mean, one is, obviously, you know, the builders don't want to sell at a lower price.
[Guest]: And so if they don't want to sell at a lower price, they are effectively selling at zero
[Amit Varma]: then because they're not selling at all for the moment.
[Guest]: Yes, but then see the entire game is now, you know, they're basically waiting for the
[Guest]: market to sort of recover.
[Guest]: Now what has also happened is that, you know, liquidity in the form of private equity money
[Guest]: from abroad has come in.
[Guest]: So what they typically they tend to do is that when they do a deal with a private equity
[Guest]: investor, they cut prices specifically for him.
[Guest]: So this guy buys, let's say, a portion of the project at a lower price and he's happy
[Guest]: to sit on it for prices to go up, you know, in four, five, six years' time or whatever
[Guest]: his investment horizon is.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, if, you know, whatever the prices are, he would be, you know, he
[Guest]: would sell.
[Guest]: So a liquidity in that form has come in.
[Amit Varma]: The second thing…
[Amit Varma]: So, sorry to interrupt, but just to clarify that.
[Amit Varma]: So what it basically means is that the cost that the builder invests in building a particular
[Amit Varma]: property, acquiring the land, etc., etc., he recoups that through these early sales
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the pressure on him to sell the rest of the apartments and so on is not
[Amit Varma]: high.
[Guest]: He can just afford to wait.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But the other thing that, you know, needs to be sort of taken into account here is,
[Guest]: and I mean, I've been writing this for many years now, is that India's income tax laws
[Guest]: up until February 1st, 2017, when Arun Jaitley made his latest budget speech, essentially
[Guest]: encouraged people to speculate in real estate.
[Guest]: Now what happens is when you buy your first home, which is, and you live in it, which
[Guest]: in income tax terms is called a self-occupied house, the deduction that you get on your
[Guest]: taxable income for paying home loan interest is limited to Rs. 2 lakhs or rather was limited
[Guest]: to Rs. 2 lakhs, whereas if you buy a second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, tenth, whatever,
[Guest]: xth number of home and you finance it using a home loan, the entire interest that you
[Guest]: paid on that home loan was available as a deduction against your taxable income to the
[Guest]: condition that you added a notional rent to your taxable income if you were not renting
[Guest]: that house out.
[Guest]: Now, you would know that the rental yields are like abysmal, you know, 1-2 percent, whereas
[Guest]: EMIs are huge.
[Guest]: So that essentially ensured that a lot of corporate crowd, you know, senior level corporate
[Guest]: crowd essentially brought down their, you know, taxable income and paid very little
[Guest]: tax.
[Guest]: By investing in real estate.
[Guest]: And at the same time they created an asset, right.
[Guest]: Now in this budget, Arun Jaitley made a very, you know, sensible sort of change and wherein
[Guest]: he limited the tax deduction to Rs. 2 lakhs across all home loans.
[Guest]: So this essentially takes the speculation that was happening at the corporate level
[Guest]: in order to avoid tax out of the window.
[Guest]: Now what happened was, for a lot of these guys, you know, who have a second, third home,
[Guest]: it just did not make, they were not bothered about the fact whether prices went up or not.
[Guest]: They were just bothered about the fact that their taxable income was coming down dramatically
[Amit Varma]: and they were paying very low tax on it.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense it was a glitch in the system which helped the rich who already had houses
[Amit Varma]: and could afford more houses at the expense of the poor and the middle class who might
[Amit Varma]: have been saving up to buy a house.
[Amit Varma]: But hey, the prices never came down.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So a lot of these, you know, if you go to, I mean, I mean, I talked to my MBA batchmates
[Guest]: and a lot of them, you know, have two, three homes.
[Guest]: They don't require it.
[Guest]: It's just that, you know, it was essentially a tax dodge that was on for a very long time.
[Amit Varma]: And this is now over.
[Amit Varma]: So was this a big enough factor that you expect this to happen?
[Guest]: It wasn't a very big factor, but it was a factor nonetheless.
[Guest]: You know, the bigger factor is essentially, you know, people have this huge belief that
[Guest]: real estate prices don't go down.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that is a very big factor.
[Amit Varma]: Then there are…
[Amit Varma]: Which was there in the US and 15 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Then there is black money.
[Guest]: I mean, for a very long time, black money, a lot of black money found its way into real
[Guest]: estate.
[Guest]: And the way it works is very, very interesting.
[Guest]: You know, what happens is you sort of buy your, you know, you get some black money from
[Guest]: somewhere and you buy a house.
[Guest]: Now when you sell that house, you get a bigger amount of black money back, right?
[Guest]: So then what do you do with it?
[Guest]: Then you go looking for, you know, a cheaper location where you can buy, let's say you
[Guest]: had bought one, you know, house with that black money.
[Guest]: Now you go buy two homes with that black money, right, in a cheaper location.
[Guest]: So black money essentially leads to the multiplication of black money in real estate.
[Guest]: And this is a chain which is very difficult to break.
[Guest]: And what has also happened is, I mean, you know, to answer your specific question as
[Guest]: to why sales have fallen and prices haven't.
[Guest]: Now you know, look at a guy who's already, you know, invested, you know, who probably
[Guest]: has three, four homes or whatever.
[Guest]: And he's invested a lot of his black money in it.
[Guest]: Now even if, let's say he were to sell those homes right now, he decides to sell them,
[Guest]: and he sells them at whatever the market price is, and I mean, whatever the buyer is willing
[Guest]: to pay.
[Guest]: Even if, you know, he's even willing to take a loss, okay, loss as in he's willing to take
[Guest]: a price which is lower than what he expected in the past, not a loss.
[Guest]: Now he gets the money back, a lot of it is black money, now what will he do with that
[Guest]: black money?
[Guest]: You know, he can go buy, you know, more real estate, but that isn't giving him the kind
[Guest]: of returns that it was in the past.
[Guest]: So for him, the best decision is to stay put.
[Guest]: So if, you know, he doesn't sell, so if there are no distressed sales, the prices will not
[Guest]: come down.
[Guest]: I mean, there need to be an enough number of distressed sales wherein people need liquidity.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, when people have large amounts of black money, A, they get trapped into real
[Amit Varma]: estate because that is practically the only efficient vehicle for their black money.
[Amit Varma]: And B, because black money within real estate tends to increase in the ways that you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, it becomes a spiral and this prevents demand from going down as much as it otherwise
[Amit Varma]: might.
[Amit Varma]: Now, regardless of that, overall demand has sort of gone down and prices haven't gone
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason you gave for that, of course, is that builders having recouped their initial
[Amit Varma]: investment are willing to wait it out and they're just going to…
[Guest]: See, it's also another factor that you need to take into account is the fact that every
[Guest]: builder is essentially, not every builder, but most big builders are essentially fronts
[Amit Varma]: for politicians.
[Amit Varma]: So that's what I was getting to.
[Amit Varma]: So my question there was that I can imagine this being a good rationale for one builder
[Amit Varma]: or two builders or whatever, but in a competitive marketplace, some builder or the other will
[Amit Varma]: say ki nahi main bech deta ho and then that turns the whole market, but does a competitive
[Guest]: marketplace exist?
[Guest]: It's a competitive market because, you know, if you look at it, there are way too many
[Guest]: builders, but there are hardly any pan-India builders.
[Guest]: Forget pan-India builders, there are no builders who work across a particular state or even
[Guest]: a particular city.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the city of Mumbai, it is clearly divided among builders.
[Guest]: You know, you have one builder who is, you know, who operates in only in Goregaon or
[Guest]: you have one builder who operates only in Navi Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: So explain this to me.
[Guest]: Why is this so?
[Guest]: Well, it's primarily because the rules and regulations that govern real estate are so
[Guest]: complicated that you essentially as a builder cannot operate if you do not have a politician,
[Guest]: you know, blessing you and a politician's influence cannot go all across India.
[Guest]: So he has an influence in a certain place and which is where the builder thrives.
[Amit Varma]: So every local politician who's big in a certain area will give his patronage to a local builder
[Guest]: and then it will be a symbiotic relationship between them, power and money.
[Guest]: Which is how it is.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at, I mean, this is, I mean, probably not true everywhere, but it
[Guest]: is true at a lot of places.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me this, when you have a situation like this where the price isn't coming down
[Amit Varma]: despite demand falling so much, as they say, something's got to give some time.
[Amit Varma]: So what?
[Guest]: That's the million dollar question, you know, I've been writing for five years, six years
[Guest]: now that prices will fall, prices will fall.
[Guest]: Even music's going on, people are dancing.
[Guest]: It's nothing like that's happened.
[Guest]: I mean, even though, in fact, I mean, one thing that I would like to state here is that,
[Guest]: I mean, on one count, I've been right as to that investment in real estate hasn't made
[Guest]: sense for the last five, six years.
[Guest]: And I mean, I have been totally right on that count.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, prices haven't fallen and people who actually need homes to live in
[Guest]: have been unable to buy homes.
[Guest]: I mean, that is also a factor that needs to be considered here.
[Guest]: And that's a very, you know, that's a major factor, because, you know, what typically
[Guest]: happens is people become desperate to buy a home when the child starts to go to school.
[Amit Varma]: Because till then it is easy, you know, you can probably move from flat to flat, and it's
[Guest]: not as difficult, but the moment you get a child, you know, you obviously want a stable
[Guest]: school life for him, you want him to have friends, right?
[Guest]: That is, and you know, it's, and then people become desperate.
[Guest]: And that desperation, essentially, then manifests, you know, itself into situations where builders
[Guest]: are not ready to cut prices.
[Guest]: And I mean, then there are a lot of other factors from, you know, FSI, and FSI rent
[Guest]: control.
[Guest]: I mean, there are various things.
[Guest]: All that is also there.
[Guest]: And the fact that, you know, the government owns a lot of land in a lot of Indian cities,
[Guest]: living in the middle of a lot of Indian cities, and so that sort of creates a, I mean, even
[Guest]: though land is really not an issue, because India is a huge, big country, and we can always
[Guest]: keep expanding.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the city of Delhi, the way it is expanded on all sides is unbelievable.
[Guest]: So if anyone says that there's no land and all, I mean, that's basically bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: Except in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: It's true for Mumbai.
[Guest]: And in Mumbai, there is artificial shortage also because of low FSI.
[Guest]: And the fact that the entire eastern front of the city is not, you know, the Mumbai Port
[Amit Varma]: Trust.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that's unique to Indian cities, for example, is that the army often has a
[Amit Varma]: lot of land, even in the middle of cities like the Pune Cantonment, and the Navy Nagar
[Amit Varma]: over here, Bangalore.
[Guest]: And this is really not the case with any other country in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, this was probably needed when the British ruled India and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But now it's not.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's not.
[Amit Varma]: And all that land is a huge opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: And if, A, if you free up that land, B, if you increase FSI, like to give a sense of
[Amit Varma]: that, FSI in Bombay, you know, in our big cities is between one and four.
[Amit Varma]: And like in New York, it's 15, in Shanghai, it's 13.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when the Empire State Building was built, I believe it was 25.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no reason why FSI can't be much more than a lot of those government land.
[Guest]: So what happens if you increase FSI, then, you know, how do state level politicians make
[Amit Varma]: money?
[Guest]: That's an interesting political economic question.
[Guest]: In fact, then there is there is also the case of change in land usage, wherein, you know,
[Guest]: what happens is that a farmer cannot sell his land to an industrialist.
[Guest]: An industrialist cannot buy land from a farmer.
[Guest]: So you need the government in between.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the government is the politician.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a few episodes ago, I did an episode on the right to property with Shruti Rajagopalan.
[Amit Varma]: And she brought exactly this out that one of the reasons Robert Wadra made so much money
[Guest]: was by using the, you know, the change in land usage.
[Guest]: He managed to acquire land at very cheap as agricultural land, and then he's changed immediately
[Guest]: the value shoots up.
[Guest]: I mean, he also made a lot of money because he got financed from DLF, I mean, exactly
[Amit Varma]: for all this.
[Guest]: So it was almost like he got, I mean, he got an industry loan.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a feeling that he has no issues finding a place to stay in this country.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: It was great having you on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: To follow Vivek on Twitter, do go over to at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: All my writings are archived at IndiaUncut.com.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed this episode, you can subscribe to the Seen and the Unseen on iTunes, Stitcher
[Amit Varma]: or any podcast app of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: All our back episodes are available at SeenUnseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Seen and the Unseen, check out another great show by IVM
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Unknown]: up-and-coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: See you next time.